docs/models/models.md, before:

# Available models

Here is a list of the pre-trained ColBERT models available in PyLate along with their results on BEIR:

=== "Table"

| Model                                 | BEIR AVG | NFCorpus | SciFact | SCIDOCS | FiQA2018 | TRECCOVID | HotpotQA | Touche2020 | ArguAna | ClimateFEVER | FEVER | QuoraRetrieval | NQ   | DBPedia |
|---------------------------------------|----------|----------|---------|---------|----------|-----------|----------|------------|---------|--------------|-------|----------------|------|---------|
| [lightonai/colbertv2.0](https://huggingface.co/lightonai/colbertv2.0)                 | 50.02    | 33.8     | 69.3    | 15.4    | 35.6     | 73.3      | 66.7     | 26.3       | 46.3    | 17.6         | 78.5  | 85.2           | 56.2 | 44.6    |
| [answerdotai/answerai-colbert-small-v1](https://huggingface.co/answerdotai/answerai-colbert-small-v1) | 53.79    | 37.3     | 74.77   | 18.42   | 41.15    | 84.59     | 76.11    | 25.69      | 50.09   | 33.07        | 90.96 | 87.72          | 59.1 | 45.58   |


???+ note
    `lightonai/colbertv2.0` is the original [ColBERTv2 model](https://huggingface.co/colbert-ir/colbertv2.0/tree/main) made compatible with PyLate. We thank Omar Khattab for allowing us to share the model on PyLate.

    We are planning to release various strong models in the near future, but feel free to contact us if you want to make your existing ColBERT compatible with PyLate.

Commit message:

Allow to set the prefixes for stanford-nlp models (#55)
* Allow to set the prefixes for stanford-nlp models

* Version bump

* Add documentation for the jina-colbert-v2 model

docs/models/models.md, after:

# Available models

!!! tip 
    Following an update, all the models trained using the stanford-nlp ColBERT library or RAGatouille should be compatible with PyLate natively.
    You can simply load the model in PyLate:

    ```python
    from pylate import models

    model = models.ColBERT(
        model_name_or_path="colbert-ir/colbertv2.0",
    )
    ```

    Note that some models can use non-default parameters (e.g, prefixes) and so you might have to specify them, e.g for the [jinaai/jina-colbert-v2](https://huggingface.co/jinaai/jina-colbert-v2) model, you need to specify the prefixes and allow the query tokens to attend to expansion tokens:
    ```python
    model = models.ColBERT(
        model_name_or_path="jinaai/jina-colbert-v2",
        query_prefix="[QueryMarker]",
        document_prefix="[DocumentMarker]",
        attend_to_expansion_tokens=True,
        trust_remote_code=True,
    )
    ```


Here is a list of some of the pre-trained ColBERT models available in PyLate along with their results on BEIR:

=== "Table"

| Model                                 | BEIR AVG | NFCorpus | SciFact | SCIDOCS | FiQA2018 | TRECCOVID | HotpotQA | Touche2020 | ArguAna | ClimateFEVER | FEVER | QuoraRetrieval | NQ   | DBPedia |
|---------------------------------------|----------|----------|---------|---------|----------|-----------|----------|------------|---------|--------------|-------|----------------|------|---------|
| [lightonai/colbertv2.0](https://huggingface.co/lightonai/colbertv2.0)                 | 50.02    | 33.8     | 69.3    | 15.4    | 35.6     | 73.3      | 66.7     | 26.3       | 46.3    | 17.6         | 78.5  | 85.2           | 56.2 | 44.6    |
| [answerdotai/answerai-colbert-small-v1](https://huggingface.co/answerdotai/answerai-colbert-small-v1) | 53.79    | 37.3     | 74.77   | 18.42   | 41.15    | 84.59     | 76.11    | 25.69      | 50.09   | 33.07        | 90.96 | 87.72          | 59.1 | 45.58   |
| [jinaai/jina-colbert-v2](https://huggingface.co/jinaai/jina-colbert-v2) | 53.1    | 34.6     | 67.8   | 18.6   | 40.8    | 83.4     | 76.6    | 27.4      | 36.6   | 23.9        | 80.05 | 88.7          | 64.0 | 47.1   |


???+ note
    `lightonai/colbertv2.0` is the original [ColBERTv2 model](https://huggingface.co/colbert-ir/colbertv2.0/tree/main) made compatible with PyLate. We thank Omar Khattab for allowing us to share the model on PyLate.

    We are planning to release various strong models in the near future, but feel free to contact us if you want to make your existing ColBERT compatible with PyLate.
