docs/documentation/retrieval.md, before:

## ColBERT Retrieval

PyLate provides a streamlined interface to index and retrieve documents using ColBERT models. The index leverages the Voyager HNSW index to efficiently handle document embeddings and enable fast retrieval.

### Indexing documents

First, load the ColBERT model and initialize the Voyager index, then encode and index your documents:

```python
from pylate import indexes, models, retrieve

# Step 1: Load the ColBERT model
model = models.ColBERT(
    model_name_or_path="lightonai/colbertv2.0",
)

# Step 2: Initialize the Voyager index
index = indexes.Voyager(
    index_folder="pylate-index",
    index_name="index",
    override=True,  # This overwrites the existing index if any
)

# Step 3: Encode the documents
documents_ids = ["1", "2", "3"]
documents = ["document 1 text", "document 2 text", "document 3 text"]

documents_embeddings = model.encode(
    documents,
    batch_size=32,
    is_query=False,  # Ensure that it is set to False to indicate that these are documents, not queries
    show_progress_bar=True,
)

# Step 4: Add document embeddings to the index by providing embeddings and corresponding ids
index.add_documents(
    documents_ids=documents_ids,
    documents_embeddings=documents_embeddings,
)
```

Note that you do not have to recreate the index and encode the documents every time. Once you have created an index and added the documents, you can re-use the index later by loading it:
```python
# To load an index, simply instantiate it with the correct folder/name and without overriding it
index = indexes.Voyager(
    index_folder="pylate-index",
    index_name="index",
)
```
#### Pooling document embeddings
[In a recent study](https://www.answer.ai/posts/colbert-pooling.html), we showed that similar tokens in document embeddings can be pooled together to reduce the overall cost of ColBERT indexing without without losing much performance. You can use this feature by setting the `pool_factor` parameter when encoding the documents to only keep 1 / `pool_factor` tokens. The results show that using a `pool_factor` of 2 cut the memory requirement of the index in half with virtually 0 performance drop. Higher compression can be achieved at the cost of some performance, please refer to the blogpost for all the details and results.

This simple modification to the encoding call thus save a lot of space with a very contained impact on the performances:

```python
documents_embeddings = model.encode(
    documents,
    batch_size=32,
    is_query=False,  # Ensure that it is set to False to indicate that these are documents, not queries
    pool_factor=2,
    show_progress_bar=True,
)
```

### Retrieving top-k documents for queries

Once the documents are indexed, you can retrieve the top-k most relevant documents for a given set of queries.
To do so, initialize the ColBERT retriever with the index you want to search in, encode the queries and then retrieve the top-k documents to get the top matches ids and relevance scores:

```python
# Step 1: Initialize the ColBERT retriever
retriever = retrieve.ColBERT(index=index)

# Step 2: Encode the queries
queries_embeddings = model.encode(
    ["query for document 3", "query for document 1"],
    batch_size=32,
    is_query=True,  #  # Ensure that it is set to False to indicate that these are queries
    show_progress_bar=True,
)

# Step 3: Retrieve top-k documents
scores = retriever.retrieve(
    queries_embeddings=queries_embeddings, 
    k=10,  # Retrieve the top 10 matches for each query
)

print(scores)
```

Example output

```python
[
    [   # Candidates for the first query
        {"id": "3", "score": 11.266985893249512},
        {"id": "1", "score": 10.303335189819336},
        {"id": "2", "score": 9.502392768859863},
    ],
    [   # Candidates for the second query
        {"id": "1", "score": 10.88800048828125},
        {"id": "3", "score": 9.950843811035156},
        {"id": "2", "score": 9.602447509765625},
    ],
]
```

## Remove documents from the index

To remove documents from the index, use the `remove_documents` method. Provide the document IDs you want to remove from the index:

```python
index.remove_documents(["1", "2"])
```

Commit message:

Adding information about parameters influencing the search quality

docs/documentation/retrieval.md, after:

## ColBERT Retrieval

PyLate provides a streamlined interface to index and retrieve documents using ColBERT models. The index leverages the Voyager HNSW index to efficiently handle document embeddings and enable fast retrieval.

### Indexing documents

First, load the ColBERT model and initialize the Voyager index, then encode and index your documents:

```python
from pylate import indexes, models, retrieve

# Step 1: Load the ColBERT model
model = models.ColBERT(
    model_name_or_path="lightonai/colbertv2.0",
)

# Step 2: Initialize the Voyager index
index = indexes.Voyager(
    index_folder="pylate-index",
    index_name="index",
    override=True,  # This overwrites the existing index if any
)

# Step 3: Encode the documents
documents_ids = ["1", "2", "3"]
documents = ["document 1 text", "document 2 text", "document 3 text"]

documents_embeddings = model.encode(
    documents,
    batch_size=32,
    is_query=False,  # Ensure that it is set to False to indicate that these are documents, not queries
    show_progress_bar=True,
)

# Step 4: Add document embeddings to the index by providing embeddings and corresponding ids
index.add_documents(
    documents_ids=documents_ids,
    documents_embeddings=documents_embeddings,
)
```

Note that you do not have to recreate the index and encode the documents every time. Once you have created an index and added the documents, you can re-use the index later by loading it:
```python
# To load an index, simply instantiate it with the correct folder/name and without overriding it
index = indexes.Voyager(
    index_folder="pylate-index",
    index_name="index",
)
```
#### Pooling document embeddings
[In a recent study](https://www.answer.ai/posts/colbert-pooling.html), we showed that similar tokens in document embeddings can be pooled together to reduce the overall cost of ColBERT indexing without without losing much performance. You can use this feature by setting the `pool_factor` parameter when encoding the documents to only keep 1 / `pool_factor` tokens. The results show that using a `pool_factor` of 2 cut the memory requirement of the index in half with virtually 0 performance drop. Higher compression can be achieved at the cost of some performance, please refer to the blogpost for all the details and results.

This simple modification to the encoding call thus save a lot of space with a very contained impact on the performances:

```python
documents_embeddings = model.encode(
    documents,
    batch_size=32,
    is_query=False,  # Ensure that it is set to False to indicate that these are documents, not queries
    pool_factor=2,
    show_progress_bar=True,
)
```

### Retrieving top-k documents for queries

Once the documents are indexed, you can retrieve the top-k most relevant documents for a given set of queries.
To do so, initialize the ColBERT retriever with the index you want to search in, encode the queries and then retrieve the top-k documents to get the top matches ids and relevance scores:

```python
# Step 1: Initialize the ColBERT retriever
retriever = retrieve.ColBERT(index=index)

# Step 2: Encode the queries
queries_embeddings = model.encode(
    ["query for document 3", "query for document 1"],
    batch_size=32,
    is_query=True,  #  # Ensure that it is set to False to indicate that these are queries
    show_progress_bar=True,
)

# Step 3: Retrieve top-k documents
scores = retriever.retrieve(
    queries_embeddings=queries_embeddings, 
    k=10,  # Retrieve the top 10 matches for each query
)

print(scores)
```

Example output

```python
[
    [   # Candidates for the first query
        {"id": "3", "score": 11.266985893249512},
        {"id": "1", "score": 10.303335189819336},
        {"id": "2", "score": 9.502392768859863},
    ],
    [   # Candidates for the second query
        {"id": "1", "score": 10.88800048828125},
        {"id": "3", "score": 9.950843811035156},
        {"id": "2", "score": 9.602447509765625},
    ],
]
```

### Parameters affecting the retrieval performance
The retrieval is not an exact search, which mean that certain parameters can affect the quality of the approximate search. First, because we leverage a HNSW index, the usual parameters can be passed when creating the index:

- `M`, the maximum number of connections of a node in the graph. Higher values will improve recall and reduce retrieval time but will increase memory usage and the creation time of the index.
- `ef_construction` the maximum number of neighbors for a node during the creation of the index. Higher values increase the quality of the index but increase the creation time of the index.
- `ef_search` the maximum number of neighbors for a node during the search. Higher values increase the quality of the search but also the search time.

Please refer to dedicated [HNSW documentation for more details](https://www.pinecone.io/learn/series/faiss/hnsw/).

Another parameter not related to the index strongly influence the quality of the search, `k_token`. It corresponds to the number of neighbors retrieved for each of the query token and so the total number of candidates scored. Higher values will consider more candidates and so get better results but will slow the search.

```python
index = indexes.Voyager(
    index_folder="pylate-index",
    index_name="index",
    override=True,  # This overwrites the existing index if any
    M=M,
    ef_construction=ef_construction,
    ef_search=ef_search,
)

scores = retriever.retrieve(
    queries_embeddings=queries_embeddings, 
    k=10,  # Retrieve the top 10 matches for each query
    k_token=200 # retrieve 200 candidates per query token
)

```
## Remove documents from the index

To remove documents from the index, use the `remove_documents` method. Provide the document IDs you want to remove from the index:

```python
index.remove_documents(["1", "2"])
```
